coming up next is the science fiction radio show so stay with us
this is the science fiction radio show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy
and here are your hosts
this is daryl lane and david carson in 1979 two remarkable science fiction
novels that seemed to share a number of amazing coincidences were published one
of the novels was the fountains of paradise the hugo award winner for that year
its author was british writer arthur c clark the other was web between the
worlds its author was charles sheffield also british besides the fact that both
authors were british both novels treated an identical theme satellites in
geosynchronous earth orbit or space elevators neither author knew that someone
else is working with the same idea but sheffield doesn't believe it's that
startling a coincidence it's not really very surprising because the idea has
been around a long time the idea was proposed back in 1960 and i read of it in
1960 in 1966 i read of it which was the first time it was published in the west
a russian called art sutanov published it in 1960 but he published it in russian
in a publication that no one ever saw or heard of but i remember the 1966
publication in science magazine and thinking that's a neat idea and putting it
off in the back of my head and uh presumably several others had noticed it and
thought of it at the same time and it's coincidence that clark and i should
write the books so close together but in a sense uh if the books hadn't been
written so close together they would not both have been written because when
somebody has written a book on a subject like that there's a tendency for other
people not to write uh with that same technological development sheffield says
there was something coincidental about his discovery before publication of
either book that clark had done the same thing that he had the coincidence was
that after as i had reached the point where i'd sent my manuscript off to ace
books and a friend of mine said that he heard that clark had written this book
which was then available in galleys in which he had a space elevator and when i
read the book i i i sent clark my manuscript and he wrote back and said he was
fascinated but he wasn't that surprised and when i read his book i realized what
he meant by that what he meant was that when you get right down to it the basic
physics dictates what the uh structure must be like and it's very natural to
have your hero previously making a bridge of a bridge builder because this is in
a sense a bridge from the earth up to orbit uh we had both in fact chosen heroes
with very similar names that was a coincidence his hero was called morgan mine
was called merlin and before they built the space elevator they had both been
the world's leading builder of bridges sheffield goes on to relate some of the
less obvious similarities about the two novels but there were some other rather
strange coincidences that were not obvious from the from reading the books one
of them was when i was thinking of my of my principal character i had as a model
for him a 19th century english engineer called brunel well it turned out that
clark actually had brunel in his book and references to him and that's an odd
coincidence that is perhaps explained by the fact that the clark came from
england and so did i and we were sensitive to the english engineering tradition
that's the only way i can explain that but there were a number of coincidences
it's not too surprising that we should write books in which the beanstalk or
space elevator looks very similar but there are other things that that are a bit
more surprising than that but as one of my as one of my characters it keeps on
saying in a different book uh the laws of probability don't just permit
coincidences they absolutely require them and to me it's not that surprising
that clark and i should have written the same book at the same time not the same
book if you follow me but books with with a similar theme science fiction
readers should feel fortunate coincidences or not that both of these remarkable
novels were published
this has been the science fiction radio show a production of the permian basin
science fiction association produced in conjunction with odessa college in
odessa texas so
you
coming up next is the science fiction radio show so stay with us
this is the science fiction radio show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy
and here are your hosts
this is david carson and daryl lane charles sheffield belongs to that small
subgroup of science fiction authors who are practicing scientists hal clement
robert forward fred hoyle and soon carl sagan will be some other authors in the
group sheffield who has a degree in theoretical physics and works for the earth
satellite corporation in washington dc has published such popular novels as web
between the worlds site of proteus and my brother's keeper in addition to
numerous short stories we asked him how he found time to be a scientist and a
science fiction author well i don't write as much as uh as what my wife would
call real writers write uh full-time writers should be able to produce a lot
more than i do one reason i produce as much as i do produce is because i enjoy
it i consider it a form of pleasure and relaxation and so i do it for choice
when i'm not doing other things but i feel that that if i didn't have a job i
might write a lot more but i would probably enjoy it a lot less and in terms of
somebody who is prolific i don't produce much at all if you look at the
productivity of well now i have to think of somebody who's prolific i suppose
andy offutt has written a couple of hundred books probably uh cj cherry produces
i think probably three books a year jack chalker produces probably five books a
year silverberg when he was writing full time produced lord knows how many words
a year one and a half million two million something like this uh in terms of
productive people i have a minute output when we remarked that many readers
liked his fiction so well they'd wish he'd take up writing full time and produce
more of it he had an interesting response i appreciate the compliment but i
suspect that that if i had more time i wouldn't write that much more i would
find other ways of of doing things i probably if i had half a day to write uh in
other words if i worked half time at my job instead of full time i would produce
more but i might saturate because it would cease to be enjoyable after doing it
for a certain period each day the definition that people use of a real writer is
somebody who has to write who will starve if they can't write and will write
even if they have to starve i don't know if that makes sense by those terms i
don't consider i'm a real writer at all because although i like to write it's
not the top of my priority of things i want to do and the scientific work
occupies a higher slot uh marion zimmer bradley said that when when she had to
choose between uh a marriage and her writing or anything else in her writing her
writing wins that it's the most important thing in her life i just don't have
that much uh attachment to it and i think the fact that i didn't write for so
long that i started uh for no particular reason after not writing for a long
time may maybe uh one of the reasons i don't consider i'm a a true writer i
never felt the urge to write when i was young i never felt that fiction was
something i had to do but many writers have that and it dominates their lives
finally we asked sheffield if he had fun writing i think i do i i certainly love
to sit down and write i i often don't have time to do it but that's a different
consideration i find that that the several things that help me one is that i
don't have to do it that uh that i'm doing it as a hobby another is that i write
lots of non-fiction and when i write non-fiction i'm constrained in what i can
think in other words if you're writing respectable science you somewhat have to
put yourself into a into an acceptable framework and if you think outrageous
thoughts you can't really write them down or you have to limit yourself whereas
in fiction you can think the most outrageous thoughts imaginable and generally
speaking the more outrageous they are the more people like them so i do enjoy
writing this
has been the science fiction radio show a production of the permian basin
science fiction association produced in conjunction with odessa college in
odessa texas
to remember
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Marion Zimmer Bradley's latest novel is a
fantasy epic that deals with the legends of King Arthur. It's entitled The Mists
of Avalon, and it's recently been published in a hardcover edition by Alfred A.
Knopf. There are numerous retellings of the Arthurian material, some scholarly,
some pure fantasy, but The Mists of Avalon is different. In the first place,
it's built around a strong thesis, that the rise of Arthur as a Christian king
in a male-dominated society, coincided with the passing away of the old pagan
religion of the Celtic Druids, which was female-oriented. And secondly, Bradley
concentrates her narrative on the women of the Arthurian legends. These would
include Guinevere, Arthur's wife and queen, Ygrine, his mother, Viviane, the
lady of the lake and high priestess of Avalon, and Morgaine, or Morgan Le Fay,
sorceress and wizard lady. Bradley tells us how she came to write the book.
Well, all my life I've been fascinated by King Arthur, but even more, I've been
fascinated by Morgan Le Fay. Mallory didn't approve of her, and she's been
treated as a sort of evil sorceress, you know, quote-unquote. And you can hear
the capital letters all the way from Texas, I'm sure. So I started wondering who
Morgan Le Fay and the lady of the lake really were. And there were a lot of
books on the search for the historical Arthur, but I started out on the search
for the historical Morgan Le Fay. How did she get into the legends? And it led
me into the byways of pagan religions, into Druidism, into, I don't mean the
modern thing, but what Caesar wrote about, and enormous amounts of ancient, you
might say ancient culture. So I finally came up with the realization that the
whole Arthurian cycle is based upon the shift from Druidical and Celtic
religions to Christianity. And in the Celtic culture and the Celtic mythology
and the Celtic religion, women were preeminent, whereas in Christianity, St.
Jerome and St. Augustine tried to convince every woman that she should be
constantly doing penance and covered with shame for the very fact that she was a
woman. And that ghastly culture shock, I think, pervaded the whole Arthurian
mythos. Mallory didn't get hold of it until later. The novel is remarkable for
its wealth of detail and its attention to character, both strong points in all
of Marion Zimmer Bradley's work. All of the characters from the Arthurian
legends come alive in the novel, people like Merlin, Gwaine, and Galahad.
Lancelot is in the novel, of course, and his love of Guinevere is sensitively
handled by Bradley. Bradley talks about the ideas beneath the novel. I took one
element of fantasy, the idea that as our beliefs in the world change, our world
changes with it. The idea that people used to act and believe as if the world
were the center of the universe, and now we know that the sun is at the center
of our galaxy, but that we're way out on the edge of it, and that changes our
relationship to ourselves and our world. When people believed that the source of
life was just the mother, that was one belief system which very firmly and
deeply pervaded their consciousnesses. And then when the idea came that the
mother was incidental, that man was created in God's image and women was just a
poor imitation, it must have been a monster culture shock. And so I gave the
idea that the world actually changed at that time, that the religion, the idea
of only having one God instead of a pantheon of God, changed people's minds. So
I took one fantasy element, the idea that as these old worlds, as people's ideas
changed, the world changed too. So the world where the elves lived sort of went
into another dimension, being replaced by a world of pagan religion. And then
when the world changed again, the world of pagan religion, what I call the world
of Avalon, went into the mists. Anyone who likes fantasy, or anyone who enjoys
reading about King Arthur, will be fascinated with the mists of Avalon. And the
fascination should last for a long while too. In its hardcover format, the novel
is over 800 pages. The word epic describes it well.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas. The Science
Fiction Radio Show,